You are listening to a message from First Baptist Church, Wichita Falls.
For more information about First Baptist, click the link in the show notes or go to FBCWN.org.
Today's message comes from Senior Pastor, Dr. Bob McCartney.
Let's take our Bibles this morning and open them to 2 Corinthians, chapter 12, verse 7.
Welcome.
Welcome to those of you in 11 o'clockies at Shepherd campus, at West campus.
Glad that you're here this morning for the second message in a series we're calling Into the Valley.
Not all of life is going to be lived on a high, not all of life is going to be lived on the mountaintop, and there are going to be moments when we're going to descend into the valley, and today we're going to talk about descending into a valley
that becomes very, very real for a lot of people.
And that is the valley of chronic illness and pain.
Today we're gonna talk about what happens when your miracle doesn't come.
And by that I mean maybe your physical miracle for healing.
The good news is Americans are living longer.
Our lifespans are increasing.
There was kind of a blip or a small dip in the COVID pandemic.
But the arrow actually keeps going up into the right.
Americans are living longer.
The downside of that or the dark side is that Americans are living longer, but they're living with sometimes chronic illness and pain.
76%, that's three out of four of adults over the age of 40 live with some sort of chronic illness or some sort of chronic pain.
Now, many of them can be managed with
medication or with therapy, and we are thankful for the advances of medical science.
But some people live with excruciating pain, and about 24%, one out of every four say that the pain or the problem that they have physically keeps them from living the lifestyle that they would like to live.
So this is a very, very real issue.
If you live long enough, something's gonna hurt.
I was down at the Expo for the Hotter in Hell this year, and there was this guy who walked in.
He looked like he's about 75 years old.
He's going to ride the ride.
He walks in on his t-shirt.
It had a very simple message, and it said, everything hurts.
I mean, you get to that point where you just, you're going to have to manage it or live with it or surrender to it.
But this morning, we're going to talk about this valley that many of us are going to walk through.
and it is the valley of chronic illness.
For some people, it is cancer.
For others, there's heart disease or kidney disease.
For some people, there are autoimmune disorders that become excruciatingly painful and affect their lives in deep ways.
There's rheumatoid arthritis and a lot of problems that begin to creep up on people.
Some early onset, sometimes it happens later in life,
But there are other issues too.
A lot of times when we think about these issues, we think, well, well, he's really preaching this sermon today, like to the old people, because they're the ones that get this stuff, right?
Well, cancer affects almost every generation.
It's not unheard of, at least we have to be honest and say that.
But also, there are other issues that are very real for younger people, like the issue of infertility.
It's very, very painful, not only physically, but emotionally.
when you want a child and you come to church and man, everybody celebrated the new babies that people were given and you want one really bad.
And my wife and I walk through that valley.
And so by the way, I do have, I make a covenant with couples.
And that is that if you struggle with infertility, if you will send me an email, I will add you to my personal prayer list.
I'm gonna be on the church prayer list.
I will put you on my personal prayer list and I will pray for you every day until you send me the message that God has given you a baby or you've decided that maybe that's not God's will, but I will pray for you every day personally because that's kind of a burden that I have for people I understand that.
But let me say this, it also happens in younger people's lives through perhaps accidents or injuries.
A young man wants to play Major League Baseball and
All of a sudden something goes wrong with a shoulder or with tendons and the doctors say, you know, we can patch you up, but you're never gonna play the sport that you love again.
So these are very real issues, not just for older people, but they can be very real for all of us.
And so we're gonna talk about this today because there is this real tension of three issues.
If you love the Bible, if you love God, there are some things you believe
But sometimes they're like a tug of war on one another.
One is we believe that God is Almighty.
The Bible teaches that.
We affirm that God can do anything.
He can heal, he can restore.
There is nothing that is too difficult for God.
God is Almighty.
We affirm that God is good.
We sing about that.
We believe in the
goodness of God, that his thoughts and his actions toward us are motivated out of a heart that is good.
And then there's that third reality.
Horrible, awful things happen.
And those things pull at one another.
If God is good and God is Almighty, one of these awful things happen
And why do they happen to me?
That's really where it comes down.
So this morning we're going to explore this from a passage of scripture in which one of God's choice servants experiences a chronic issue of illness and pain.
And he tells us in the beginning part of this chapter that 14, for 14 years this has been going on.
This isn't a little cold that he had for a while.
This is something that's been going on for 14 years, 14 years earlier.
God gave him a revelation.
His name is Paul.
And God, he says he was taken up into the third heaven.
And what that means is that in the Greek mindset, there are three levels of heaven.
The first heaven is like the sky and the clouds.
The second heaven is the stars and the sun, the moon, the planets.
But the third heaven is like where God dwells.
And so Paul says, I was caught up into the third heaven.
I saw things that I can't explain to you.
I experienced the presence of God in a real manifest way, not just something that was feeling.
He said it was tangible.
And because of that, he says something incredibly consequential happened in his life.
Listen to what he says in verse seven of 2 Corinthians 12.
Because of the extraordinary greatness of the revelations, for this reason, to keep me from exalting myself, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to torment me, to keep me from exalting myself.
Concerning this, I pleaded with the Lord three times that it might leave me.
And he has said to me, my grace is sufficient for you.
For power is perfected in weakness.
Most gladly therefore, I will rather boast about my weaknesses so that the power of Christ may dwell in me.
Therefore I delight in weaknesses, in insults, in distresses, in persecutions, in difficulties,
in behalf of Christ for when I am weak, then I am strong."
Let's talk about this fact of life, of how you manage it, how do you cope, how do you move forward in your faith, insanity, when your miracle doesn't come.
Well, Paul talks about a thorn in the flesh here, so we're going to sort of center on that.
And I want to give you three thoughts from this passage.
First of all, we need to learn there is a reason for the thorn.
We need to learn there are reasons that these thorns show up in our life.
It is not random.
Paul says there was given to me a thorn in the flesh.
Now, when you think thorn, you're thinking about that little sharp pointy
part of a rose that kind of pricks your finger if you pick up a rose the wrong way and you're negligent in that.
It might even draw just a little bit of blood, but that is not what that word means in the language of the New Testament.
In the Greek New Testament, that word doesn't mean splinter.
It means a stake.
This is something that would have caused excruciating pain in Paul's life.
It was not some minor nuisance.
It was an absolutely debilitating condition.
Now Bible scholars have debated what this was for centuries.
You can read 10 commentaries and get 11 opinions about what this thing was, okay?
Some people say it was the consequences, the lingering consequences of malaria.
Once you get malaria, you have problems with it forever and there was no vaccination, there was no medication for malaria back then.
Other people say it was Paul's eyesight.
You think about somebody like Paul who loved to read, who loved to study, who loved to write.
Failing eyesight could be a real debilitating problem.
Other people say a variety of other things.
And so I've studied it real hard this week and I've dug in and I've come to an answer.
We don't know.
But I do believe a couple of things about it.
First of all, it's a thorn, it's a stake.
So it's very painful.
It's in the flesh.
It was some sort of physical condition that he had.
Now, I believe personally,
that the language here is purposefully vague.
Because if Paul would have said, you know, God gave me this messenger from Satan, this, this eyesight problem, then every other problem that we have, we would say, well, would the Paul don't know how I feel.
But with it being sort of purposefully vague, then all of our issues can fit into the category.
And I think
Sometimes God gives us very specific instructions in the Bible.
Sometimes they're a little bit more broad in order for us for our issue, whatever it might be to be included in the bunch.
Also look carefully at the source of this problem.
He says, there was given to me.
That's an important word.
And he calls it a messenger of Satan to torment me.
When I've read this passage over and over in the past, and I've preached it before, I have talked about how Satan is the source of this pain, and Paul does call it a messenger of Satan.
But there's something really interesting in this that, look, I want you to understand something.
I learn something every week, and I probably learn more than I'm able to share with you in the sermon.
But that word given is incredibly important and I had never really dug in and dissected this before.
The word given is the word edote in the language of the New Testament.
And when it is used in literature, it is always referring to a divine gift.
It's a gift from God.
And so when he says it was given to me, then
God is the one doing the giving.
He said, but he calls it a messenger of Satan.
Well, how is that possible?
Let me help you.
There's a story in the Old Testament, a story of a man named Job.
And Job lost everything.
He lost his health.
He lost his wealth.
He lost his family.
And every time he lost, but before he lost something, every time Satan had to go ask God for permission to afflict Job.
Here's what I want you to know.
Satan may strike you.
but God always supervises.
Satan is not equal with God.
Satan is under God and God is the one who is in control.
But here's the uncomfortable part of that.
God does allow it.
And that is really uncomfortable and it's hard for us to take.
So what are the reasons for these thorns?
Let me give you three real quick.
First of all,
The first reason that we have illness and pain and physical problems is because we live in a broken world.
Adam and Eve were placed in the Garden of Eden, which was perfect.
And in Genesis chapter one and Genesis chapter two, what we get is this wonderful story of a place of perfection.
There was no pain in the Garden of Eden.
There were no problems in the Garden of Eden.
There was no physical illness in the Garden of Eden.
I mean, they could go smell the flowers and not get allergies.
It was absolutely wonderful.
But when sin enters the picture, here's what the Bible says, that with sin, you get a consequence.
And that consequence is death.
Physical death comes into the world as a result of the fallen sin.
So everything that ultimately leads us to physical death, the fact that our bodies begin to wear out as we age, the fact that when you turned your ankle and you were 17, two days later, you were back.
Back on the playing field when you turn your ankle and you were 35 years old in a you kind of limped around for a week And then you got back into the action when you turn your ankle and you're 61 a month later.
You're going maybe I ought to go to the doctor about this or maybe I did something bad I mean stuff just doesn't heal as fast as it used to that's just that's a fact and Not only that but these chronic conditions
begin to creep in whether they are inherited from our families because the genes just don't work exactly right or whether it is something that we do to ourselves through some injury.
Illness and pain is a part of the fall in sin.
Part of the reason that you suffer may not be personal disobedience.
It may not be that you have done anything wrong.
It may well be that it's just a part of living in this world.
But there is a second reason.
And the second reason you need to understand is spiritual.
And it is because sometimes we experience pain because it is the disciplining hand of God.
Now that's not a joyful thought, but it's true.
In Hebrews chapter 12, the writer of Hebrews said, furthermore, we had earthly fathers to discipline us.
And we respected them, shall we not much rather be subject to the father of spirits and live, for they disciplined us for a short time as it seemed best to them.
But he disciplines us for our good so that we may share in his holiness.
The writer of Hebrews says that the father disciplines
everyone that he accepts as his child.
When you came into the family of God, you got a good, good father.
And a good father is not just a live it up, party it up, Disneyland dad, no discipline.
No, a good father disciplines his children.
And we have a good father.
And so there are moments
that he disciplines us for our good, and sometimes that means physical affliction.
There is a third reason, and that's the reason that Paul gives us.
It's a protection.
Sometimes pain is a protection.
Paul says the reason, in verse seven he says, for this reason, to keep me from exalting myself.
It was a protection against sin in Paul's life.
Sometimes God allows
things to come into our lives that are personally painful because what he is doing is protecting us because in our flesh we would go off the rails.
What God understood from Paul was this.
He gave Paul this great privilege of this incredible revelation that Paul saw things that nobody else had ever seen before.
Paul experienced things.
Paul knew the presence of God in a real way.
He was face to face.
in the presence of God in this vision.
And because of that, Paul would have had a tendency to grow prideful.
Pride is a sin.
It really is.
And there are other sins that God may be protecting you from when he allows something to come into your life that is personally painful.
Eric, I'm Eric Wayne Hymer, was four years old.
when he was diagnosed with a degenerative eye disease.
Over the next decade, his vision got progressively worse.
At first, he could see fine then, he couldn't see at night, and then his peripheral vision began to narrow, and eventually, the lights went out.
By the age of 13, he was completely blind.
But he decided that he would not allow that physical condition to stop him.
And so in 2003, he became the first blind person to ever climb Mount Everest.
It's pretty impressive.
Eric said, quote, I can't control blindness, but I can control how I respond.
Pain doesn't make you weaker.
It becomes the training ground for strength.
You can't control what happens to you, but you can control your response to what happens to you.
So learn that there are reasons for the thorns.
Second, listen for the Lord in the thorns.
Listen very carefully.
You see, our response to pain is to cry out, but the answer is found in listening.
Paul says in verse eight, concerning this.
I pleaded with the Lord three times that it might leave me.
Three times.
Now when you hear that, this isn't like Paul says, like three nights in a row.
I prayed, now I lay me down to sleep.
Lord, please take this pain away in Jesus' name, amen.
No, that's not it.
It was three
seasons, extended seasons of intense fervent prayer.
He uses the word I pleaded.
That is a word in the New Testament for a beggar asking for bread.
He begged God.
God, please take this pain away.
Some of you have begged God.
You have been on your knees and there have been prayers that have been prayed through bitter tears.
And you have pleaded with God.
And you've said, God, please take this pain away.
And you received the same thing the Apostle Paul received.
A gentle, but firm.
No.
And that's hard to take.
It's really hard.
to take.
I say that to you to encourage you though, that one of God's choice servants, the Apostle Paul, I mean like he's one of the heroes of the faith in the New Testament.
He didn't get the answer that he wanted to his prayer.
Can I tell you that there was even a moment when Jesus received a gentle but firm no from the Father?
It happened.
It happened in the Garden of Gethsemane.
In the Garden of Gethsemane, Jesus was praying.
And he prayed, Father, if you are willing, remove this cup from me, yet not my will, but yours be done.
Father, could you please remove this cup?
He knows the cross is in front of him.
And the Father responds, no.
There's no other way.
You see, when God says no, it's always because he has a better yes.
When he would not remove the cup of suffering and the cup that Jesus had to drink on the cross, when he would not remove that from him, it's because he had a better yes.
And that better yes was a gospel that would save you and me.
See, when God says no, he always has a better yes.
Paul says, I asked God, I begged God, I pleaded with God,
in verse nine, and he has said to me, that expression he has said looks like it's past tense in the English translation.
The Greek language has a lot of tenses, more than past, present, future.
This is in what is called the perfect tense.
In other words, it means he said once and for all.
God says, I am settling this issue, the answer
is a firm and final no.
I'm going to tell you, when God says no, it's hard.
It's hard.
There are moments when you question the power of God and you question the goodness of God.
And even when you don't get a no, maybe what's worse than no is just the silence.
Some of you in this room have felt that too.
But I want to say this to you.
The silence of God is not the absence of God.
Though God may be silent, he is not absent.
Because what he may be doing is drawing you very, very close to him so that you can experience a level of his love and provision that you had not known before.
Tim Keller was a prolific author.
I think he wrote like over 30 books.
One of the most brilliant minds of our generation when it came to the things of God, planted a church from nothing in New York City.
And Redeemer became a lighthouse for the gospel in that pagan city.
But Tim Keller was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer.
And I gotta be honest with you, I'm not one to question the wisdom of Almighty God, but I'm like, God, Tim Keller's doing great things.
I mean, he's not even a Baptist, he's a Presbyterian, but I mean, we're on the same team.
And as far as I'm concerned, we're on the same team if you're preaching the same gospel.
So I'm like, God, he's doing great things and people are getting saved and wonderful things are happening.
He's bringing glory to your name and the kingdom of God is expanding by what he's doing.
And so why are you,
letting him have this messenger of Satan that is pancreatic cancer.
In the last few days or months of his life, he gave an interview and won the last interviews that he gave.
And he said this, the greatest gift of this illness is that it has brought me closer to the reality of God's love than I ever imagined.
He experienced
a greater measure of the love of God in the midst of personal pain.
Listen for the Lord in the thorns.
Finally, look for the blessings in the thorn.
Look for the blessings in the thorn.
In verse nine, Paul said, and he has said to me, and then he tells us what God told him.
My grace is sufficient for you, for power is perfected in weakness.
The word sufficient means to satisfy.
It means enough.
When we use the word enough, most of the time we use it and we mean this, enough to get by.
That's not what that Greek word means.
It doesn't mean enough to get by.
God doesn't just say, Paul, I'll give you enough to get by.
It means enough to satisfy.
My grace will satisfy you, Paul.
Just surrender to where you are and what is happening.
And I will make my power perfect.
in the middle of your weakness.
Yeah, I've thought about this a lot this week.
And it's amazing.
When somebody is, you know, healthy and strong and they give a testimony for Christ, I mean, it's a great thing.
I love that like when athletes or when someone who has a platform, they give glory to God for what's happening in their life, I think that's wonderful.
But you know, I think even more powerful.
is when someone is weak, and when they have problems.
When someone like Nick Vuyashish, whom we've had here in our church, born with no arms and no legs, when Nick gives glory to God, I mean, I watch Nick and I'm like, my back hurts.
So what?
I have arms and legs and He's giving glory to God and I'm lining.
There is something about that that really is powerful, that God's power is made perfect.
It's perfected in our weakness.
But let me also give you a reason that sometimes God doesn't take pain away because your pain is your platform.
You are, I know you think you're unique.
I know you do.
I think I'm unique, but you aren't.
Somebody had your problem before you got it.
Somebody's gonna have your problem after you have it.
You say, well, Bob, that's not really encouraging.
But here's the point.
God wants you to serve out of your scars.
In 2 Corinthians chapter 1, Paul writes, blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and the God of all comfort.
He comforts us in all our afflictions so that we may be able to comfort those who are in any kind of affliction through the comfort we ourselves receive.
Here's what that means if you didn't follow.
When we have personal pain, when we have chronic issues, when we are walking through life, wanting healing and the miracle doesn't come, but God says, my grace is sufficient and God comforts us in that affliction.
Then what Paul is saying is God gave you that comfort to pass on to someone else.
to minister to them, to serve from the scars, to let your pain be your platform in order to bring glory to God in Jesus Christ.
See, God wants to use you.
He really does.
He wants to use your story because there's someone who is far from him that he loves
And it's not going to be the preacher that reaches them.
It will be someone who shares their affliction, who shares their pain, who knows what it feels like to walk through that problem.
And they say, Jesus helped me through this and he can help you too.
Jesus provided for me through this.
His grace became the grace that satisfies, and that just gets me by, but that satisfies me through this.
For my generation, one of the movie stars that we loved was Michael J.
Fox.
Even some of you who are younger, you've watched the back to the future movies.
They're classics now.
I realize that means that it's old, but they're classics.
When Michael J.
Fox was 29 years old, 29, he was diagnosed with young, onset Parkinson's disease.
It is incredibly rare but not unheard of.
He hid it for a long time because he still wanted to act and then it got to a place where it was taking such a toll on his body that he simply no longer could act.
He said this,
not long ago in an interview now in his sixties.
I'm not gonna lie.
It stinks, heaven, Parkinson's.
But if I could trade it in, I wouldn't.
It has given me a sense of purpose I never had before.
I don't know what your pain point is.
But there is something about coming to the place of saying,
I wouldn't trade it in because it has given me a purpose.
It has given me an avenue to reach others and to serve and to pour out my heart for Jesus so that others will come to know Him and bring great glory to God.
You've been listening to a message from First Baptist Church, Wichita Falls.
For more information about First Baptist, including gathering times and locations,
Click the link in the show notes or go to FBCWF.org.
We'll see you next week.